-
Let's do now the JavaScript task. And let's first, you know, summarize what we need to do before starting.
So we have this js folder.
And what we want to do is we want to create one single file to compile, just like the SASS file here.
Like the bundle file.
And then if we want to include other JavaScript files we will import them using JavaScript ES6 import
statements.
So let's say we have the
bundle.js.
And we have maybe a folder for components.
And say a slider component.
What we'd like to is to import the slider component using import statements like so,
all right?
And also be able to use ES6  JavaScript so we can use the "let" keyword here.
And compile just this one file
which will include other files.
Right?
So let's do this now. So you can find a lot of Gulp plugins that will transpile ES6 to ES5. I'll have one
of them can support module bundling.
And by modular bundling I mean using the import statements here to bundle all files into just one single
file.
So one of the famous plugins that support module bundling is called "webpack". And webpack is actually,
it's not a Gulp plugin, it's a separate library. But we'll just need to use the module bundling
and ES6 compiling part of it.
And thankfully somebody made a Gulp integration with webpack. So it's called "gulp"
I think "webpack stream".
Yeah, "webpack-stream".
So let's install it.
And always make sure you are in the right directory.
So now it's installed. Let's see how to use it.
So let's we go back to the gulpfile now and "import
webpack from
'webpack-stream'".
And let's create a new task.
And let's call it "scripts".
And we'll return a stream.
So let's type the source and the destination here.
So let's put after the.
So "scrips:"
And "src:"
And there will be
"src/assetsjs/bundle.js".
So as I mentioned we need to have all the JavaScript bundle in one file so we have one file here and
then the destination will be "dist/assets/
js".
Right? So that's in the source we'll have "paths.
scrips.src".
And then we'll pipe the webpack plugin.
So "webpack()".
And let's save it to
our destination. So "gulp.dest" and then "paths.scrips.dest". So let's try out this
now.
So let's run "gulp js" and see what will happen.
Sorry, "gulp scripts".
And I've an error.
All right. So
looks like we mistyped something in the here, "assets/js". Let's run
again.
So as you can see you've created something here.
So now in your dist directory you should have a js folder with the generated file. So as you can see it
adds some stuff here.
And then we'll find our file "let x = 0".
So that's weird right
"let" is not supported in ES5.
So this should be converted to "var".
So actually what we've done is that we activated module bundling or using the input statements, but we
haven't yet used webpack to transpile our files.
And to do that we'll install another plugin.
So "npm
install --save" and it's called " babel-loader".
And now it's installed so webpack works with something called loaders. So we can add in an object to the
webpack argument, first argument. And then a key of "module:"
and then "loaders:"
and there will be an array of loaders. And loaders are actually what webpack uses in order to, you know,
transform a file or do some sort of a task like the task we've been doing using Gulp. So I'm not gonna
go into more details
in webpack.
It's not important for you.
But you can read more about it if you would like.
So the first loader, the first item in the loaders array will test for
JavaScript files.
So if the file we are parsing is a JavaScript file it will run this loader. And then "use:" and this is the
loader that we would like to use.
So it's the loader that
we've just installed "babel-loader" which will transpile the files from ES6 to ES5, right?
And we're gonna have options. And we can define our preset.
Remember
the preset that you should define when you want to use Babel. We use it here in the .babelrc
file, "". So it's the same thing here.
But here we have to define, to write
the whole NPM package name and sorry. And not just "env".
So if you don't have any webpack experience before this may look weird to you, but you can just follow along
and it's not really important for you as a WordPress developer to know what's going on here.
Do read more about it if you would like. So let's try run this now.
"gulp scripts".
And we've an error.
Ok,
that's "presets".
not "preset".
I hope that's the error.
Ok, so we now have a new bundle.
So let's go to the js folder.
And now it's "var" and not "let". Because we're now using the "babel-loader" in order to transpile ES6 into ES5.
So notice here the Hash things that webpack does everytime you create a new file and with a new
Hash. This might be useful actually in order to when you change something in your js files, it
will create a new Hash.
And you can avoid browser caching and you know it could be useful.
But let's keep it simple for now and just rename this hash into a constant file name in order to
load it easily in the WordPress side.
So let's add one more option to the webpack.
So after the "module" let's add "output:"
and then "filename:"
and "bundle.js". And let's run "gulp script" again.
Now the file name is bundle.js as you can see.
And here it is.
So this way when we load the file in the WordPress site the filename will be constant.
We know that there is a file called bundle.js in the dist directory. But if we use the hash here we
will have to do additional stuff in order to figure out the name and load it. So let's keep it
simple for now.
So let's now load the bundle.js file
in the WordPress site. So I want to go to
enqueue-assets. And we are enqueueing a style here so there is similar function for enqueueing scripts. And let's call,
as you might expect, "wp_enqueue_scripts" or "script". So we have the handler.
So let's use our prefix as we agreed and then "scripts"
and the source.
So it's the "get_template_directory_uri"
to get the themes directory. And then
our bundle would be in "dist/
assets/js/bundle.js".
mistyped bundle.js
And then we have an array of dependencies.
So let's leave it as an empty array for now.
And "in_footer" this is a boolean.
If you want to add your scripts in the footer set this "true". If you want added in the header set it
to "false".
So I'd like to add it into footer so we can avoid render blocking and make our web page loads faster.
So we're missing a semi-colon. So that's it.
So let's make sure you've, you are having your MAMP server is open and open your web site.
And let's add actually something to bundle.js
like a "console.log()" or something.
So we can make sure it's loaded.
So let's "console.log(x)". And save and run.
And let's open the our console. And refresh and we're having the console log.
So we are successfully loaded a file but now as you may notice we have the same CSS problem. We've here
says the console log is coming from bundle.js.
And it's actually coming from bundle.js so let's add another console log in the slider.
So any number and run the task.
We're not watching yet for changes. And refresh.
So we have this one here.
It says
it's coming from bundle.
js.
When it's actually coming from slider.js. So we need to add the sourcemaps like we did for
the SASS.
Right?
And to do that we don't have to use the sourcemaps like we did for the styles.
Actually webpack have an option to add sourcemaps
before compiling so we can add "devtools" or "devtool:".
And this could either be a sourcemaps or inline sourcemaps.
So I'm gonna use inline sourcemaps.
The sourcemaps option will add the sourcemaps in separate files, the inline one will add in the same
file.
All right.
So let's run the task now and see.
So let's open the bundle file.
And now we have the sourcemap.
So that's what I meant when I said it adds the
sourcemap in the same file.
Otherwise it will add it in the in a separate file in the js folder. And doesn't really matter just, I just like
to use the inline one.
So let's refresh here.
And now we're having the actual slider file, right?
So that's great. So
one more thing, we would like to add this option only for production,
right?
So you can do it in the expression here.
So if not production add the inline sourcemap option.
Otherwise just set the "devtool" to "false".
So now if we run it
I really hope you're not hearing these cats.
So now it should be working now.
The sourcemaps but if we run it for production
it shouldn't have sourcemaps, right?
One more final thing for this video,
I know it's probably too long.
But after compiling and bundling the JavaScript, we want to minify it for production also.
So I'm gonna use a plugin called "gulp uglify".
And it's a plugin that simply minifies JavaScript. So let's install it and use it real quickly. So install.
while it's installing let's import it.
So "import uglify from 'gulp-uglify".
All right. And we'll simply after the webpack pipe, we will pipe the "uglify". And only for production.
So if production
uglify, otherwise don't do.
So this should work.
So I'm gonna run the scripts for production
And we should have our bundle file minified as you can see.